.TH SPAI 1 "2026" "spaiSH" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
spai \- AI agent for your terminal
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spai
[\fIFLAGS\fR] [\fIQUERY\fR]
.br
.B spai
.I SUBCOMMAND
[\fIARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B spai
is a Claude-Code-style AI agent that works in your terminal.
Give it a task in plain language; it reads files, runs commands, and edits
code on your behalf.
Every action that changes your system is shown before execution and requires
your confirmation.
.PP
.B spai
works with remote models (Anthropic Claude or any OpenAI-compatible API) and
local models (Ollama).
It is a single statically-linked binary with no daemon.
.PP
Run
.B spai
with no arguments to start an interactive multi-turn REPL session.
Supply a query as positional arguments for a one-shot request.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-autonomous
Run all tool calls without confirmation prompts.
Equivalent to
.B /mode auto
inside the REPL.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Propose a plan of tool calls but never execute any of them.
Equivalent to
.B /mode plan
inside the REPL.
.TP
.B \-\-local
Force the local inference backend (Ollama) for this request, ignoring the
configured remote provider.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Show full command output and iteration details while the agent loop runs.
.TP
.B \-\-session \fIID\fR
Name the session explicitly.
Falls back to
.B $SPAI_SESSION_ID
and then to the pinned session (see
.BR "spai sessions" ),
and finally to the literal string \fIdefault\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-legal
Print the legal disclaimer and license notice, then exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the build version string and exit.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B init
.TQ
.B setup
Run the first-run setup wizard.
Choose a provider (Anthropic, an OpenAI-compatible endpoint, or Ollama), set
the model, and run a live connection test.
The wizard writes configuration to
.IR ~/.config/spaish/spaid.toml .
.TP
.B resume
Reopen the most recently used session in the interactive REPL.
.TP
.B sessions
With no arguments, list all sessions with message counts and ages.
.br
.B spai sessions \fIID\fR
\(em create the session if it does not exist and pin it so future invocations
use it.
.br
.B spai sessions \-\-reset
\(em clear the pinned session, reverting to
.B $SPAI_SESSION_ID
or
.IR default .
.TP
.B history [\-\-session \fIID\fR]
Browse the session transcript in
.BR less (1)
(or
.BR more (1)
if
.B less
is not available).
.TP
.B clear [\-\-lines \fIN\fR] [\-\-session \fIID\fR]
Wipe the session's conversation context.
With
.B \-\-lines \fIN\fR,
keep only the last \fIN\fR messages.
.TP
.B compact [\-\-session \fIID\fR]
Ask the model to summarise and compact the session history to reclaim context
window space.
.TP
.B rebuild-context [\-\-session \fIID\fR]
Rebuild the AI context from the raw history stored on disk.
.TP
.B llm \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]
Manage local model runtimes and models.
Run
.B spai llm help
for the full subcommand list.
Sub-commands include:
.RS
.TP
.B status
Show the active runtime and model.
.TP
.B install [\fIruntime\fR]
Install a local runtime.
Supported runtimes:
.B ollama
(default),
.BR bitnet .
.TP
.B use\-runtime \fIruntime\fR
Switch the active runtime.
.TP
.B list
List installed and recommended local models.
.TP
.B pull \fImodel\fR
Download a model (e.g.\&
.IR qwen2.5-coder:7b ).
.TP
.B remove \fImodel\fR
Delete a model from local storage.
.TP
.B use \fImodel\fR
Set the active model for local inference.
.RE
.SH SPECIAL SYNTAX
.TP
.B spai !!
Equivalent to asking
.I "My last command failed. What went wrong and how do I fix it?"
The shell expands
.B !!
to the previous command before
.B spai
sees it only if your shell history expansion is enabled; otherwise pass the
literal string.
.TP
.B "command | spai \fIQUERY\fR"
Pipe up to 64 KB of stdin into the query as additional context.
.SH INTERACTIVE REPL
Running
.B spai
with no arguments (or
.BR "spai resume" )
starts an interactive session with a readline prompt.
.SS Slash commands
.TP
.B /help [\fIcommand\fR]
Show the command list, or detailed help for one command.
.TP
.B /mode [\fBmanual\fR|\fBauto\fR|\fBplan\fR]
Show the current execution mode, or set it.
.br
.B manual
(default) \(em write, elevated, and destructive actions ask for confirmation.
.br
.B auto
\(em run all tool calls without prompting.
.br
.B plan
\(em propose tool calls but never execute them.
.TP
.B /model [\fIprovider\fR[:\fImodel\fR]]
Show configured providers and models, or switch the active one.
Examples:
.B /model ollama
,
.B /model openai:gpt-4o
,
.B /model anthropic
.
.TP
.B /tools
List the tools available to the agent in this session.
.TP
.B /mcp
Connect to configured MCP servers and show their status and discovered tools.
.TP
.B /cost
Show estimated token usage and dollar cost for the session.
.TP
.B /clear
Wipe the session's conversation context while keeping the session open.
.TP
.B /compact
Summarise the conversation and compact it to reclaim context window space.
.TP
.B /history
Print the full transcript recorded for this session.
.TP
.B /init
Scaffold a
.I SPAI.md
project-context file in the current working directory.
.TP
.B /undo
Revert the last file mutation made by the agent
.RB ( write_file ,
.BR edit_file ,
.BR apply_patch ,
or
.BR multi_edit ).
Original bytes are snapshotted before each write under
.IR .spai/checkpoints/<session>/ ;
created, edited, and deleted files all round-trip. Prompts once in
.B manual
mode.
.TP
.B /redo
Re-apply the last mutation reverted by
.BR /undo .
.TP
.B /jobs [\fIid\fR]
List all background bash jobs (id, status, command).
With an optional
.I id
argument, show the full captured output and exit code for that job.
Background jobs are started by the
.B bash
tool when called with
.B run_in_background=true
\(em the command runs without blocking and its output is buffered in memory.
The same permission gate applies to background commands as to foreground ones.
.TP
.B /quit
.TQ
.B /exit
.TQ
.B /q
Leave the session.
.SS Custom slash commands
Markdown files placed in
.I .spai/commands/
become user-defined slash commands: a file named
.I deploy.md
is invoked as
.BR /deploy .
The file body is a prompt template expanded and run as a normal agent turn, so
it inherits
.I SPAI.md
project context and the usual permission gating. In the template,
.B $ARGUMENTS
expands to all arguments joined by spaces,
.BR $1 ,
.BR $2 ,
\&... to the individual positional arguments, and
.B $$
to a literal
.BR $ .
A built-in command always takes precedence over a custom one of the same name.
.SS File references
Type
.B @path
anywhere in a message to include that file's contents in the prompt.
Press
.B Tab
after
.B @
to complete file and directory names; a trailing
.B /
marks a directory you can descend into.
.SS Key bindings
.TP
.B Tab
Complete slash commands (at line start) and
.B @path
references (anywhere).
.TP
.B Shift-Tab
Cycle the execution mode: manual \(-> auto \(-> plan.
.TP
.B Esc / Ctrl-C
Cancel the current agent turn.
.TP
.B Ctrl-D
Exit the session.
.SH EXECUTION MODES
.TP
.B manual
The default.
Read-only tool calls (e.g.\& file reads, directory listings) run without
prompting.
Write, elevated, and destructive commands are shown and require confirmation.
Destructive commands (e.g.\&
.BR "rm -rf" )
additionally require typing
.B YES
to confirm each one.
.TP
.B auto
All tool calls run unattended.
Equivalent to the
.B \-\-autonomous
flag in one-shot mode.
.TP
.B plan
The agent proposes tool calls but never executes them.
Equivalent to the
.B \-\-dry\-run
flag in one-shot mode.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
API key for the Anthropic provider.
.TP
.B OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for OpenAI-compatible providers.
.TP
.B SPAI_SESSION_ID
Overrides the default session name for the current shell.
.B install.sh
injects
.B "export SPAI_SESSION_ID=$$"
into your shell RC files so each terminal window gets its own conversation.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base directory for configuration files.
Defaults to
.IR ~/.config .
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Base directory for session data.
Defaults to
.IR ~/.local/share .
.TP
.B INSTALL_DIR
Override the binary install location for
.IR install.sh .
Defaults to
.IR ~/.local/bin .
.TP
.B SPAI_FROM_SOURCE
Set to
.B 1
to force
.I install.sh
to build from source instead of downloading a prebuilt binary.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/spaish/spaid.toml
Main configuration file: provider, model, routing, MCP server list, and
permission policy.
Written by
.B spai init
and editable by hand.
Notable
.B [routing]
keys:
.B model_small
(cheap/fast model for summarisation and auto-compact calls) and
.B model_strong
(reasoning-capable model for the main agent tool-calling loop).
Both default to empty, which uses the
.B [provider]
model for everything.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/spaish/sessions/
Per-session subdirectories.
Each contains a
.I cache.json
(conversation state) and a
.I history
log.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/spaish/.first_run_done
Sentinel file that suppresses the first-run disclaimer banner after the first
invocation.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/man/man1/spai.1
Default install location for this man page.
.TP
.I SPAI.md
Optional per-project context file (in the working directory) read by the agent
to understand the project.
Scaffold one with
.B /init
inside the REPL or
.BR "spai init" .
.SH EXAMPLES
One-shot query:
.PP
.RS
.EX
spai "nginx keeps returning 502, find and fix it"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Pipe stdin as context:
.PP
.RS
.EX
git log | spai "anything worrying here?"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Ask about a failed command:
.PP
.RS
.EX
spai !!
.EE
.RE
.PP
Interactive session:
.PP
.RS
.EX
spai
.EE
.RE
.PP
Resume the last session:
.PP
.RS
.EX
spai resume
.EE
.RE
.PP
Force the local model for one query:
.PP
.RS
.EX
spai --local "summarise this file" @README.md
.EE
.RE
.PP
Dry-run (propose without executing):
.PP
.RS
.EX
spai --dry-run "rename all .txt files to .md"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Manage local models:
.PP
.RS
.EX
spai llm list
spai llm pull qwen2.5-coder:7b
spai llm use qwen2.5-coder:7b
.EE
.RE
.PP
Session management:
.PP
.RS
.EX
spai sessions             # list sessions
spai sessions work        # create/switch to 'work' session
spai sessions --reset     # unpin, revert to default
spai history              # browse current session transcript
spai clear                # wipe context
spai compact              # summarise and compact
.EE
.RE
.SH TOOLS
The agent exposes a structured tool surface to the model.
Every tool call is classified for risk and shown before execution.
Key tools:
.TP
.B bash
Run shell commands.
Classified by parsing the shell AST; safe reads run silently, destructive
commands (e.g.\&
.BR "rm -rf" )
require
.B YES
confirmation.
.TP
.B git
Structured git operations: status, diff, log, blame, show, branch, add,
commit, checkout, reset, push.
Each subcommand is tiered independently.
.TP
.B gh
GitHub CLI operations for PR workflows: read-only queries
.RB ( pr-view ,
.BR pr-list ,
.BR pr-status )
run silently; local mutations
.RB ( pr-checkout ,
.BR create-branch )
require Write confirmation; outward-facing operations
.RB ( push ,
.BR pr-create ,
.BR pr-comment ,
.BR pr-merge ,
.BR pr-close )
require Elevated approval. Requires the
.BR gh (1)
CLI to be installed and authenticated.
.TP
.B read_file , write_file , edit_file , multi_edit , apply_patch
File I/O.
.TP
.B glob , grep , list_dir
File search.
.TP
.B web_fetch , web_search , http_request
Network access.
.TP
.B code_exec
Ephemeral execution of Python, Node, Ruby, or Go snippets.
.TP
.B delegate
Spawn a named nested sub-agent (depth limited to 1). An optional
.B profile
argument selects a named agent profile that runs the sub-agent with a focused
system prompt and a restricted tool allowlist. Three profiles are built in:
.B reviewer
(read-only analysis),
.B tester
(test writing and running), and
.B general
(full tool set, default when no profile is specified). Additional profiles can
be defined in
.I spaid.toml
under
.B [[subagent.profiles]]
\(em each entry has a
.B name ,
.B system_prompt ,
and
.B tools
(allowlist) field. A profile's tool allowlist is always a strict subset of the
parent agent's tools; a sub-agent can never be granted capabilities the parent
lacks. Every action the sub-agent takes is still gated through the same
confirmation tiers as a top-level call.
.SH HOOKS
User shell hooks run around tool execution, one per
.B [[hooks]]
table in
.IR spaid.toml .
A hook with
.B event = "pre_tool"
runs before a tool and can refuse it: a non-zero exit blocks the call and the
hook's standard error becomes the reason surfaced to the model. A hook with
.B event = "post_tool"
runs after a tool succeeds and is observe-only \(em its failure is reported but
never undoes the tool. A hook matches when its
.B match
glob (\fBpath.Match\fR semantics) matches the tool name and, if present, its
.B input_match
RE2 pattern matches either the named
.B input_field
of the tool input or, when no field is named, the entire raw JSON input. The
hook command receives the raw JSON input on standard input and the
.BR SPAI_HOOK_EVENT ,
.BR SPAI_TOOL_NAME ,
.BR SPAI_TOOL_INPUT ,
and
.B SPAI_TOOL_OUTPUT
(post only) environment variables;
.B timeout_ms
(default 30000) hard-kills a slow hook.
.PP
A
.B pre_tool
hook fires only after the tier/confirm gate has already approved the call, so it
is pure defense-in-depth: it can only add a restriction, never auto-approve,
skip a confirmation prompt, or change a tool's tier. A hook
.B command
is arbitrary shell run with the user's privileges via
.BR sh (1)
\(em the same trust level as
.I SPAI.md
and
.BR [permissions].allow_commands ,
not a sandbox against the model. Absent
.B [[hooks]]
means no hooks and behaviour identical to before.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR less (1),
.BR ollama (1)
.PP
Project home and documentation:
.I https://github.com/srjn45/spaiSH
.PP
MCP (Model Context Protocol):
.I https://modelcontextprotocol.io
.SH AUTHORS
srjn45
.SH LICENSE
Apache License 2.0.
See
.I https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
or run
.B spai \-\-legal
for the full text.
